you
this lecture is about the probabilistic
of retrieval model in this lecture we're
going to continue the discussion of tax
retrieval methods we're going to look at
another kind of very different way to
design ranking functions then in the
vector space model that we discussed
before in probabilistic models we define
the ranking function based on the
probability that this document is
relevant to this query in other words we
are we introduce a binary random
variable here this is the variable R
here and we also assume that the query
and the documents are all observations
from random variables note that in the
Baptist based model we assume they are
Baptists but here we are assumed we
assume they are the data observed from
random variables and so the problem of
retrieval becomes to estimate the
probability of relevance in this
category of models there are different
variants the classical problem is model
has led to the be m25 retrieval function
which we discussed in the vector space
model because it's a form is the after
similar to a vectors space model in this
lecture we're going to discuss another
subclass in this big class called a
language modeling approaches to
retrieval in particular we're going to
discuss the query light code retrieval
model which is one of the most effective
models in probabilistic models there is
also another line called divergence from
randomness model which has led to the
Pierre to function it's also one of the
most effective state-of-the-art
retrieval functions in query light code
our assumption is that this probability
of relevance can be approximated by the
probability
of query given a document and ranma's so
intuitively this probability just
captures the following probability and
that is if a user likes document Dean
how likely would the user enter query
queue in order to retrieve document so
we assume that the user likes T because
we have a relevance value here and then
we ask the question about the how likely
we will see this particular query from
this Musil
so this is the basic idea not to
understand this idea let's take a look
at that the general idea or the basic
idea of probabilistic retrieval models
so here I listed some imagine the
relevance of status values or relevance
judgments of queries and documents for
example in this line it shows that pure
a one is a query that the user
tightening and T one is the document the
user has a seen and one means the user
thinks the one is random in the to q1 so
this R here can be also approximated by
the creek flow data that ascertaining
had collected by watching how you
interact with the search results so in
this case let's say the user clicked on
this document so there's a one here
similarly the user clicked on T 2 also
so there is a one here
in other words T two is assumed to be
relevant to q1 on the other hand T 3 is
non relevant there's a 0 here and T 4 is
non relevant and then P 5 is again
relevant and so on so forth and this
part of maybe they are collected from a
different user and so this user typed in
q1 and then found that T 1 is actually
not useful so he wins actually none
relevant in contrast here we see it's
and oh this could be the same query
typing by the same user at different
times but d2 is also relevant etc and
now here we can see more data about
other queries now we can imagine we have
a lot of such data now we can ask the
question how can we then estimate the
probability of relevance right so how
can we compute this probability of
relevance well intuitively that just
means if we look at that all the entries
where we see this particular D and this
particular Q how likely we will see a
one on the third column so basically
that just means we can just eclectic
account we can first recount the how
many times we have seen Q and D as a
pair in this table and then count how
many times we actually have also seen
one in the third column so and then we
just compute the ratio so let's take a
look at some specific examples suppose
we are trying to compute this
probability for D 1 D 2 and D 3 for Q 1
what is the estimated probability now
think about that you can pause the video
if needed try to take a look at the
table and try to give your estimate of
the probability have you seen that if we
are interested in Q 1 and D 1 will be
looking at these two pairs and in both
cases or actually in one of the cases
the user has said this is 1 this is
random in so all is equal to 1 in only
one of the two cases in the other case
it's zero so that's one out of two
what about T 1 and T 2 well they are
here
in 1 D 2 D 1 D 2 in both cases in this
case
eyes equal to one so it's a two out of
two and so on so forth so you can see
with this approach we can actually score
these documents for the query right we
now have a score for T 1 T 2 and T 3 for
this query we can simply rank them based
on these probabilities and so that's the
basic idea
probabilistic retrieval model and you
can see it makes a lot of sense in this
case it's going to rank T 2 above all
the other documents because in all the
cases when you have seen Q 1 and D 2 R
is equal to 1 the user clicked on this
document so this also should show that
with a lot of click through there are a
search engine can learn a lot from the
data to improve their search engine this
is a simple example that shows that with
even small number of entries here we
have already estimate some probabilities
these probabilities would give us some
sense about which document might be more
rather than more useful to a user ho
typing this query now of course the
problems that we don't observe all the
queries and all the documents and all
the relevant values right there will be
a lot of unseen documents in general he
only collected data from the documents
that we have shown to the users there
are even more unseen queries because you
cannot predict what queries would be
typing by users so obviously this
approach won't work if we apply it to
unseen queries or NC document
nevertheless this shows the basic idea
of problems control model and it makes
sense intuitively so what do we do in
such a case when we have a lot of unseen
documents and unseen queries
well the solutions that we have to
approximate in some way right so in this
particular case called a query like
original model we just approximate this
by another conditional probability P of
Q given D and R is equal to 1 so in the
condition part we assume that the user
likes the document because we have seen
that the user
this document and this part shows that
we're interested in how likely the user
would actually enter this query how
lucky we will see this period in the
same role so note that here we have made
an interesting assumption here basically
we're going to assume that whether the
user types in this query has something
to do with whether user likes the
document
another was we actually make the
following assumption and that is a user
formulates a query based on an imaginary
random in the document well if you just
look at this conditional probability
it's not obvious we are making this
assumption so what I really meant is
that to use this new conditional
probability to help us a score then this
is this new conditional probability we
have to somehow be able to estimate this
conditional problem in there without
relying on this big table otherwise we
would be having similar problems as
before and by making this assumption we
have some way to bypass this big table
and try to just model how the user
formulates the query ok so this is how
you can simplify the the general model
so that we can derive a specific Iranian
function later so let's look at the how
this model would work for our example
and basically what we are going to do in
this case is to ask the following
question
which of these documents is most likely
that imaginary random documenting the
users mind when the user formulates the
square so we ask this question and we
quantify the probability and this
probability is a conditional probability
of observing this query if a particular
document that is in fact that the
imaginary relevant document in the users
mind here you can see we compute all
these query likelihood probability the
likelihood of queries given each
document once we have these values we
can then rank these documents based on
these values
so to summarize the general idea of
modern environments in the probabilistic
model is
to assume that we introduced a binary
random variable R here and then let the
scoring function be defined based on
this conditional probability we also
talked about approximating this by using
the query likelihood and in this case we
have a ranking function that's basically
based on the probability of a query
given the document and this probability
should be interpreted as the probability
that a user who likes talking in the D
would post query Q now the question of
course is how do we compute this
conditional probability and this in
general has to do with how to compute
the probability of text because Q is a
text and this has to do with a model
called a language model and this kind of
models are proposed to model text so
more specifically we would be very
interested in the following conditional
probability as assuming this here if the
user liked this document how likely the
user would oppose this query and in the
next lecture we're going to give
introduction to lammle model so that we
can see how we have model text was a
probabilistic model again